Abelisaurus was a two-legged, meat-eating dinosaur.
Abelisaurus was a theropod.
It lived in the late Cretaceous period.
All that we know about Abelisaurus comes from just one partial skull fossil.
The skull was found by dinosaur hunter Roberto Abel.
Abelisaurus was between 7 and 10 metres (23 and 33 ft.) in length.
It would have weighed around 3 metric tonnes (3.3 tons).
Abelisaurus was found in the Anacleto Formation of rocks, in Argentina
The only species of Abelisaurus to have been identified is Abelisaurus comahuensis.
Scientists think that Abelisaurus preyed on Titanosaurians – large sauropod dinosaurs

Albertosaurus is a member of the Tyrannosauridae family, which also contains tyrannosaurs, including the fearsome T Rex.
Albertosaruus lived in the late Cretaceous period, around 70 million years ago.
Albertosaurus was less than half the size of Tyrannosaurus.
Albertosaurus’s eyes were positioned on the sides of its head, whereas Tyrannosaurus’s eyes were forward-facing.
Albertosaurus had small horns or crests above its eyes. These may have been brightly colored, and used to attract mates.
Albertosaurus grew up to 9 meters (30ft.) in length.
Albertosaurus weighed up to 2 metric tonnes.
Albertosaurus was named after the Canadian province in which it was found.
Albertosaurus fossils have been found in groups. This suggests that it lived and hunted in packs.
Albertosaurus was discovered by geologist Joseph Tyrell. A group of Albertosaurus was found by Barnum Brown, an American paleontologist who also found the first Tyrannosaurus Rex.

Allosaurus was a large bipedal dinosaur. Bipedal means that it stood and walked on two legs. Its hind legs were long and powerful. Its arms, although strong, were much shorter.
At the end of each arm were three curved and pointed claws, which were up to 15 cm (6 in) long.
Allosaurus' feet had three clawed toes, and a further smaller claw further up the foot.
Although Allosaurus was quite a bulky dinosaur, scientists think that it was a fast runner. One Allosaurus fossil has bones that had at one time been broken and had subsequently healed. Scientists think that the bones may have been broken in a high-speed pursuit.
Allosaurus jaws contained around 70 teeth. These pointed backwards, and were serrated to cut through flesh. These teeth were often lost, and would grow back.
Allosaurus jaws weren’t particularly strong. It is thought that rather than crushing bones, the jaws and teeth were used for ripping and slicing off flesh.
The biggest Allosaurus specimens are up to 12 metres (39 ft.) long. The average Allosaurus was around 8.5 m (28 ft.) long.
Allosaurus stood around 4.5 to 5 m (15 – 16.5 ft.) tall.
Allosaurus probably weighed between 1.4 (metric) tonnes (3,000 lb) and 2 (metric) tonnes (4,400 lb). Other estimates are even larger; some scientists think that Allosaurus may have weighed up to 4 tonnes.

Ankylosaurus lived in the late Cretaceous period.
Ankylosaurus has been found in north west USA and in Canada.
Ankylosaurus is a member of a group of dinosaurs known as the ‘armored dinosaurs’.
The fist Ankylosaurus fossil was discovered in 1906 by famous dinosaur hunter Barnum Brown.
Brown named the Ankylosaurus in 1908. The genus name means ‘fused lizard’.
Ankylosaurus grew up to around 10 metres (33 ft.) in length.
It weighed between 5 and 7 tonnes (5.5 and 7.7 short tons).
Ankylosaurus was covered in bony plates called scutes.
Ankylosaurus’s primary weapon was a bony club on the end of its tail.
Ankylosaurus was a herbivore that grazed on low-growing plants.

Apatosaurus lived in the late Jurassic period, 150 million years ago.
Apatosaurus was a sauropod: a group of dinosaurs characterized by their large size, long necks, and long tails.
Weighing up to 36,000 kg and with a length of up to 28m, Apatosaurus is one of the largest animals to have ever walked on earth.
Peg-like teeth helped Apatosaurus to grab food, although most food was probably swallowed whole
A long, whip-like tail aided balance.
Apatosaurus may have lived to over 100 years old.
Apatosaurus was able to support its weight due to a specially modified skeleton, which included a hollow backbone.
For much of the time Apatosaurus may have had to keep its head in line with its body to allow its heart to supply its brain with blood.
Apatosaurus eggs were over 1ft in width.
Like cattle, Apatosaurus would have produced large amounts of methane and this would have affected the Late Jurassic climate.

The first Archaeopteryx fossil to be discovered was a single feather
It was found in either 1860 or 1861 by German paleontologist Christian Erich Hermann von Meyer.
Only 12 other Archaeopteryx specimens have been discovered to date
The name Archaeopteryx comes from the Greek words for ‘ancient’ and ‘wing’ / ‘feather’.
The discovery of Archaeopteryx helped support Darwin’s theory of natural selection.
After studying Archaeopteryx biologist Thomas Henry Huxley realized that birds were descended from dinosaurs.
Archaeopteryx was probably capable of powered, or ‘flapping’ flight, although it probably wasn’t a strong flyer.
Archaeopteryx was raven sized.
Apart from the presence of three claws, Archaeopteryx’s wings were structurally very similar to those of a modern bird.
Characteristics such as sharp teeth and a long bony tail mean that Archaeopteryx was closer to a dinosaur than it was to a modern bird. Although there are similarities between Archaeopteryx and modern birds, Archaeopteryx was still very much a ‘work in progress’.

Baryonyx is a member of the Spinosauridae family, and a close relation of Spinosaurus.
Baryonyx was a theropod, a large group of two-legged, meat-eating dinosaurs.
Baryonyx has an extra-large, curved claw on each thumb.
Baryonyx has a straight neck, unusual among meat-eating dinosaurs who usually have s-shaped necks.
Baryonyx lived in the early Cretaceous period, around 135 to 120 million years ago.
Baryonyx was discovered by plumber and amateur fossil hunter William J. Walker in 1983.
The Baryonyx species Baryonyx walkeri was named in honor of its discoverer.
The genus name Baryonyx means heavy, or strong claw.
It was the first large theropod of the Cretaceous period to be discovered.
The remains of fish scales have been found in Baryonyx’s stomach.

The first Brachiosaurus fossil was found in 1900 by US paleontologist Elmer Riggs
Brachiosaurus belongs to the sauropod infraorder, which includes other large, long necked dinosaurs
Brachiosaurus existed during the mid to late Jurassic period, around 155.5 to 150.8 million years ago
It could weigh as much as 60 metric tons (66 short tons).
Brachiosaurus’s forelimbs were longer than its hind limbs giving it a very upright stance
Despite its large size, Brachiosaurus had a small brain and was not very intelligent
Its large size meant it fed on tall trees and shrubs
To survive, an adult would have had to consume 400 kg (880 lb.) of food per day
Brachiosaurus probably lived in herds, although this is mainly speculation
Brachiosaurus fossils have been found in North America, Africa and Europe

Brontosaurus was estimated to have had a maximum head-tail length of 22 m (72 ft). Its maximum weight is estimated as being around 15 tonnes (16.5 US tons / 33,069 lb.).
That’s almost twice the length (and around the same weight) as a typical bus, or around three times the weight of an average African bush elephant – the largest living land animal!
Brontosaurus lived during the Late Jurassic epoch.
The Late Jurassic epoch was the third and final part of the Jurassic Period. It started around 163.5 million years ago, and ended around 145 million years ago.
The oldest brontosaurus specimens are thought to be around 155 million years old. The dinosaur is believed to have become extinct around 146.8 million years ago, before the end of the Jurassic Period.

Carnotaurus was a theropod dinosaur of the late Cretaceous period.
It lived around 72 to 69.9 million years ago
Carnotaurus was a member of the Abelisauridae family of dinosaurs.
Carnotaurus has distinctive horns above its eyes.
Carnotaurus’s arms are even shorter than those of T Rex!
Carnotaurus was light, and built for speed. It could probably reach speeds of around 35 mph (56 km/h).
All that we know about Carnotaurus comes from one skeleton, which was discovered in 1984 by paleontologist José Bonaparte.
The skeleton was so well-preserved even the dinosaur’s scale patterns were visible.
Carnotaurus means ‘meat-eating bull’
Carnotaurus was found on a farm in Argentina. The species, Carnotaurus sastrei, was named after Angel Sastre, the owner of the farm.

Ceratosaurus was a genus of mid-sized, predatory dinosaur that lived in North America in the Late Jurassic. Unconfirmed Ceratosaurus fossils have also been found in Africa and Europe. A number of features distinguish Ceratosaurus from other theropods. These include very long teeth, a row of bony plates running along its back, and, most famously, a horn on its nose and another above each eye.

Dilophosaurus is a theropod dinosaur that lived around 193 million years ago, during the Early Jurassic. One of the largest predatory dinosaurs of North America of the time, Dilophosaurus is known for the distinctive paired crests on its head. In Jurassic Park, Dilophosaurus had the fictional characteristics of an expandable frill and the ability to spit venom.
Dilophosaurus was a theropod dinosaur. Like most other theropods, it was a bipedal carnivore. Dilophosaurus belongs to the family Dilophosauridae along with Dracovenator, an African theropod of a similar size to Dilophosaurus.
Dilophosaurus was between 6 and 7 meters (20 and 23 feet) in length, and likely weighed around between 300 and 400 kg (661 and 882 lb).
Although lightly built, Dilophosaurus was large for an Early Jurassic predator, and one of the largest-known dinosaurs in Early Cretaceous North America.
A bipedal dinosaur, Dilophosaurus walked on its powerful hind legs and is likely to have been able to run at high speeds. Its arms were shorter than its legs but were powerful and capable of capturing and holding prey.
The most distinctive feature of Dilophosaurus was the pair of bony crests that ran along the top of the snout from the nostrils to above the eyes.
Dilophosaurus’s crests were delicate, and therefore unlikely to have been used as weapons. Their function may have been to regulate the dinosaur’s body temperature, or for display to attract a mate.

Diplodocus lived in North America towards the end of the Jurassic period.
It was one of the longest dinosaurs ever to have lived.
It was up to 16 tonnes (35,000 pounds) in weight and 30 metres (98 foot) in length.
It had an incredibly long neck and tail.
We still don’t know exactly how it used its long neck – it may not even have been able to raise it high off the ground
Its head was very small and its nostrils were on top of its snout.
Its long tail was probably used as a defensive weapon.
It may have been able to stand on its tail and two back legs.
It didn’t have many teeth and therefore couldn’t chew its food.
It replaced its teeth every 32 days.

Gallimimus was a mid-sized, lightly-built dinosaur. It walked on its powerful hind legs and had a long neck in proportion to its body. The arms were shorter than those of other ornithomimids, but proportionally longer than those of tyrannosaurids such as Tyrannosaurus rex. The hands had three digits and were relatively small and inflexible.
The name Gallimimus means “chicken mimic”. It refers to the neck vertebrate of the dinosaur, which resemble those of living chickens. The dinosaur had hollow bones, which were light yet strong.
Gallimimus had a small head, and a long, wide-tipped, toothless beak that was similar in appearance to that of living ducks and geese.
The eyes of Gallimimus were large and positioned on the side of the head, giving the dinosaur good peripheral vision but poor depth perception. Its brain was around the size of a golf ball.
The discovery of multiple Gallimimus specimens in the same location suggests that the dinosaur may have lived in groups
Ornithomimosaurs were built for speed and were among the fastest of all dinosaurs. Gallimimus, with its powerful legs and slender body, is thought to have been able to reach speeds of 29–34 mph (42–56 km/h).
Ornithomimids such as Gallimimus are considered to have been among the fastest dinosaurs. With its ostrich-like build, Gallimimus is often given the title of “fastest dinosaur”. It would likely have used its speed to outrun predators such as the fearsome Tarbosaurus.

Giganotosaurus lived in Argentina in the late Cretaceous period.
It was one of the largest terrestrial carnivores ever to have walked the earth.
It was probably up to 13 meters (42 foot) in length and 13 tonnes (30,000 pounds) in weight.
It was a member of the Carcharodontosauridae family of shark-toothed dinosaurs.
We haven’t found many Giganotosaurus fossils, so we still don’t know that much about it.
It ran on two legs and had small arms.
Its brain was surprisingly small, about the size of a banana.
It had 8-inch, serrated, knife-like teeth.
It may have hunted in packs.
It probably preyed upon huge dinosaurs.

Gorgosaurus was a member of the Tyrannosauridae family – the same family as Tyrannosaurus Rex.
Gorgosaurus was a theropod.
It walked on two powerful hind legs, but only had short arms.
Gorgosaurus lived around 76 million years ago, in the Late Cretaceous period.
Gorgosaurus grew up to 9m (30 ft.) in length.
It weighed around 2.5 metric tonnes (2.8 short tons).
More Gorgosaurus fossils have been found than any other Tyrannosaurid
Most Gorgosaurus specimens have been found in the Dinosaur Park formation in Alberta, Canada.
Gorgosaurus may have spent up to half of its life in a juvenile stage before undergoing a quick growth spurt to reach adulthood.
Gorgosaurus was more closely related to Albertosaurus than it was to Tyrannosaurus. It was so closely related that some paleontologists consider Gorgosaurus to be a species of Albertosaurus.

Iguanodon was a large, plant eating dinosaur of the early Cretaceous period.
Iguanodon weighed around 3 tonnes, and was around 10 meters (33 ft.) in length.
Iguanodon was discovered by English doctor and dinosaur expert Dr Gideon Mantell.
Mantell first thought that the Iguanodon tooth came from a large crocodile type animal.
Iguanodon means ‘Iguana tooth’.
Mantell discovered the Iguanodon tooth in a quarry, in Sussex, England.
A large discovery of Iguanodon specimens was made in a coal mine in Bernissart, Belguim.
Here, over 38 specimens were found.
Mantell first thought that Iguanodon had a nose spike.
Paleontologist Louis Dollo, who studied the Belgian fossils, realized that Iguanodon had a thumb spike, rather than a nose spike

Megalosaurus was a theropod dinosaur.
It walked on two legs, and had the typical long tail, short arms, and large head of a meat-eating dinosaur.
Megalosaurus was between 7 and 9 m (23 and 30 ft.) in length.
It weighed around 1 tonne (1.1 short tons).
Megalosaurus had three claws on each hand.
Megalosaurus lived around 166 million years ago in the mid Jurassic period.
Megalosaurus was found in England.
Megalosaurus was the first dinosaur to be officially named.
Paleontologist Richard Owen used Megalosaurus, together with Iguanodon and Hylaeosaurus, as examples of a previously unknown group of animals – the dinosaurs.
Because Megalosaurus was discovered before scientists realized that there had been many different types of dinosaur, many non-Megalosaurus fossils were mistakenly identified as belonging to Megalosaurus.
Fossilized Megalosaurus footprints have been found.

Parasaurolophus was a relatively large herbivore of the hadrosaurid family.
It lived in the late Cretaceous Period.
It had a large and distinctive crest that may have performed a variety of functions.
Parasaurolophus probably comprised 3 species in North America, with possibly another close cousin in Asia.
The possible functions of its crest include trumpeting for communication, social display and thermoregulation.
Researchers have been able to replicate the sound that parasaurolophus used to communicate.
Previous theories for the crest include using it as a snorkel, weapon or foliage deflector.
It was able to move either on two legs for faster speeds or on four legs for foraging.
Its teeth and jaws were well-suited to feeding on tough vegetation.
Very few parasaurolophus fossils have been found so far.
‘Joe the Dinosaur’ is a famous juvenile parasaurolophus fossil. You can see it in person at the Raymond M. Alf Museum of Palaeontology.

Spinosaurus is one of the biggest meat-eating dinosaurs, and may even have been the biggest!
Spinosaurus lived in the late Cretaceous period, around 112 to 97 million years ago.
Spinosaurus lived in what is now northern Africa. It has been found in Egypt, Morocco and Algeria.
All that we know about Spinosaurus comes from just 6 specimens.
The first Spinosaurus ever found was destroyed in World War 2.
Spinosaurus’s most distinctive feature is its huge sail. This may have been used to control the dinosaur’s temperature, or as a display to attract females.
Spinosaurus had a long, thin snout filled with straight teeth. It is likely that fish formed part of Spinosaurus’s diet.
Scientists think that Spinosaurus’s relatively long front legs mean that it probably spent some of the time walking on four legs.
Spinosaurus may have been able to swim.
Spinosaurus was a theropod. Theropods are still alive, in the shape of birds.

Stegosaurus means “roofed lizard”.
Stegosaurus was abundant in the Jurassic period, 150.8 to 155.7 million years ago.
Stegosaurus grew to around 30 ft. (9 meters) in length.
It weighed almost as much as an African Elephant – the largest modern land animal.
Stegosaurus had two rows of bony plates along its back, which may either have been for temperature control or display.
Spikes on the end of the tail were used to fend off predators such as Allosaurs.
With the brain the size of a hotdog, Stegosaurus was not believed to be very intelligent.
It was a herbivore, feeding on low lying shrubs and bushes.
Fossil evidence suggest that Stegosaurus probably lived in herds.
Stegosaurus remains have been found in both North America and Europe

Triceratops was one of the last dinosaurs in existence before the K/T extinction event 66 million years ago.
It was one of the most common dinosaurs of its age.
It had a large frill and three long horns protruding from its head.
It had one of the largest skulls proportional to body size of all land animals.
It probably lived as solitary individuals or in small groups of juveniles.
It ate a lot of tough vegetation, thus chewed its way through hundreds of replacement teeth.
Adults were probably able to inflict lethal injuries on the infamous predator Tyrannosaurus rex.
Triceratops may have used its frill to communicate.
If Torosaurus was indeed a mature stage of Triceratops, then older individuals may have developed ‘holes’ in their frills as they aged.
Triceratops has gifted the world with plentiful and highly collectible fossils.

Troodon means ‘Wounding Tooth’
Troodon was a theropod, and a member of the Saurischian group of dinosaurs. (Learn about the types of dinosaur here.)
Troodon was around 0.9m (3 ft.) in height, and just over 2m (6.5 ft.) in length.
It weighed between 40 and 50 kg (88 and 110 lb.).
Troodon had the biggest brain in relation to body size than any other dinosaur.
Its eyes were around 50 mm (2 in.) across, suggesting good low-light vision.
Troodon stood on two thin but powerful hind legs.
The second claw on each foot was elongated and sickle-shaped, making an effective weapon.
Troodon had long arms, and clawed fingers which would have been used to grip food.
Troodon lived in North America during the late Cretaceous period.

Tyrannosaurus rex means ‘King Tyrant Lizard’. The name Tyrannosaurus rex is often abbreviated to ‘T. Rex’.
T. Rex lived in western North America, which at that time was an island continent known as Laramidia.
Tyrannosaurus rex lived in the Late Cretaceous Period, around 68 to 66 million years ago.
T Rex may have lived right up to the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event that wiped out all of the non-avian dinosaurs.
T rex was 11.4 m to 13 m (37 to 43 ft.) in length. It stood around 3.96 m / 13 ft. tall at the hips.
T Rex weighed 5.4 to 8.87 (metric) tons / 5.95 to 9.77 short tons.
T Rex had between 54 and 60 long, sharp teeth. The largest T Rex tooth found is over 30 cm / 12 in. long (including the root)
Some paleontologists believe that T Rex may have had feathers, which had appeared in other, earlier theropod dinosaurs.
Most of the evidence points towards T Rex being a hunter, but some paleontologists think that it would have found most of its food by scavenging.
The arms of T. rex were one fifth the length of its legs and were too short to carry food to the mouth.

Velociraptor lived in the Late Cretaceous, at the very end of the age of the dinosaurs.
The name ‘Velociraptor’ comes from the Latin words ‘Velox’, meaning swift and ‘Raptor’, meaning robber or plunderer
Two species of Velociraptor have been identified; Velociraptor osmolskae and Velociraptor mongoliensis.
No bigger than a turkey, Velociraptor only reached 0.5m (1.6ft) in height
Despite its small size, Velociraptor could reach speeds of 40mph (60kph)
A large, sickle-shaped claw on each foot would help Velociraptor grab and hold onto prey
Rows of serrated teeth allowed Velociraptor to tear at the flesh of its prey.
Velociraptor may have had feathers. These could have been for mating displays, warmth, or egg incubation.
As a carnivore, Velociraptor would have used a combination of hunting and scavenging to find food.
Velociraptor had a relatively large brain for its size. It was likely to have been intelligent and may have used cunning to stalk its prey.
Velociraptor went extinct during the Cretaceous–Paleogene Extinction Event, together with 75% of the Earth’s species.

Dinosaurs are a group of reptiles that have lived on Earth for about 245 million years. 
In 1842, the English naturalist Sir Richard Owen coined the term Dinosauria, derived from the Greek deinos, meaning “fearfully great,” and sauros, meaning “lizard.”
Dinosaur fossils have been found on all seven continents.
All non-avian dinosaurs went extinct about 66 million years ago.
There are roughly 700 known species of extinct dinosaurs.
Modern birds are a kind of dinosaur because they share a common ancestor with non-avian dinosaurs.

Paleontologists are like detectives who examine the evidence that extinct animals left behind. Those clues to what dinosaurs were like are found in fossils—the ancient remains of an organism, such as teeth, bone, or shell—or evidence of animal activity, such as footprints and trackways.
Everything we know about non-avian dinosaurs is based on fossils, which include bones, teeth, footprints, tracks, eggs, and skin impressions. For centuries, people throughout the world have discovered amazing fossilized bones and footprints. Early finds inspired legends and fairy tales, as people imagined that these bones belonged to giants or huge monsters.
Some consider Barnum Brown, who began his career at the American Museum of Natural History in 1897, to be one of the greatest dinosaur hunters of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. He began his career at the American Museum of Natural History in 1897. Many of his greatest discoveries, including the first specimens of Tyrannosaurus rex ever found, are on display in the Museum’s dinosaur halls.
Today, in addition to patience and sharp observation skills, paleontologists employ new technologies to solve unanswered questions about dinosaurs and other fossils. Advanced imaging technology, such as CT scans, allow paleontologists to see the three-dimensional structure of fossils, often without having to remove the matrix.
Paleontologists incorporate the research of biomechanics, applying the principles of both physics and engineering to reconstruct the biological movement of non-avian dinosaurs. The information gleaned from fossil bones along with observations of both the movement and the musculature of living animal species help scientists model how non-avian dinosaurs may have moved.

The earliest known dinosaurs appeared during the Triassic Period (approximately 250 to 200 million ago). Dinosaurs evolved into a very diverse group of animals with a vast array of physical features, including modern birds.
Contrary to what many people think, not all dinosaurs lived during the same geological period. Stegosaurus, for example, lived during the Late Jurassic Period, about 150 million years ago. Tyrannosaurus rex lived during the Late Cretaceous Period, about 72 million years ago. Stegosaurus was extinct for 66 million years before Tyrannosaurus walked on Earth.
During the Mesozoic Era (a period of more than 180 million years that included the Triassic, Jurassic, and Cretaceous periods), a species of non-avian dinosaur evolved into a species of avian dinosaur. This avian dinosaur is the first bird and the forerunner of all birds. Every non-avian dinosaur went extinct 66 million years ago.
There are several theories as to what may have contributed to the mass extinction of non-avian dinosaurs and other species at the end of the Cretaceous Period. It is certain that a massive asteroid or comet struck Earth during this time, causing a dramatic shift in Earth’s climate. Some scientists speculate that this impact had catastrophic consequences for life on Earth. But other factors, including changing sea levels and large-scale volcanic activity, may also have played a significant role in this mass extinction.

Paleontologists use fossil evidence preserved in ancient rock to discover how long-extinct animals lived and behaved. 
In most cases, a fossilized bone is actually a rock made out of minerals, with no trace of the original bone material.
The discovery of dinosaur eggs and nests provided evidence for the behavior of some dinosaurs.
By comparing the skulls of Protoceratops of different ages (like in the image above), paleontologists can draw conclusions about how some dinosaurs grew.
To discover how organisms lived in the past, paleontologists look for clues preserved in ancient rocks—the fossilized bones, teeth, eggs, footprints, teeth marks, leaves, and even dung of ancient organisms.
Fossilized jaws, teeth, and dung provide important clues about what non-avian dinosaurs ate.
Series of fossilized footprints, called trackways, reveal some intriguing evidence about dinosaur behavior and locomotion.
Until recently it was believed that feathers were unique to birds. Recent discoveries, however, have unearthed evidence for feathered non-avian dinosaurs.

Paleontologists looking for dinosaur fossils begin their work by surveying areas to find sedimentary rock from the Mesozoic era. Finding the right spot takes experience and a keen eye.
Fieldwork is only a small part of what paleontologists do. They also work in the lab, examining the specimens they’ve found as well as fossils collected years earlier. They spend a lot of time classifying specimens, examining their characteristics, and determining their biological relationships.

Most theropod dinosaurs, such as Tyrannosaurus, had teeth that were pointed, slightly curved backwards, and serrated. The sharp points pierced the meat, and the serrations helped slice it by catching and tearing muscle fibers. Meat eaters didn’t chop or grind their food; they swallowed chunks whole.
Plant-eating dinosaurs had teeth of various shapes designed for their particular diets. Triceratops, for example, had hundreds of teeth that formed a solid “wall” with sharp ridges. The teeth were used to chop off vegetation. Other plant eaters, such as Anatotitan, had wide flat teeth that they used to grind up tough vegetation. The long-necked dinosaurs, such as Diplodocus, had long pencil-like teeth that they used to rake the leaves off branches. These dinosaurs swallowed the leaves whole. They also ingested small stones, called gastroliths, most likely to grind up the food in their stomachs, much the same way modern birds, such as parakeets and chickens, do today.
From an individual footprint, scientists can estimate the height of the dinosaur that made it. A rough estimate of leg length is obtained by multiplying the print length by four.
A footprint can also provide clues about the kind of dinosaur that made it. A three-toed, sharp-clawed print means the footprint-maker was likely a theropod—usually a carnivore. A three-toed print with rounded toes probably belonged to an ornithopod dinosaur—an herbivore. And pairs of unequal-sized prints were most likely the work of the four-legged, long-necked, long-tailed dinosaurs called sauropods, another group of herbivores.
Modern birds, or avian dinosaurs, have skeletal features that are almost identical to some non-avian dinosaurs.
Feathers evolved before flight and may have functioned as insulation to keep dinosaurs warm, or for display as a way to attract mates.

As far as we know, all dinosaurs reproduced by laying eggs, as do most other sauropsids (reptiles). It is very difficult to determine what species of dinosaur laid the eggs that have been discovered, because only a few dinosaur embryos have been found inside the fossil eggs.
Did dinosaurs lay big eggs? Some probably did, but there is a limit to how big an egg can be. Bigger eggs need thicker shells for support

All dinosaurs hatch from eggs, including extinct dinosaurs and modern birds; as do crocodiles, the living group most closely related to dinosaurs. Until the 1980s, discoveries of fossilized eggs and bones of young dinosaurs were extremely rare, but dinosaur eggs have now been discovered on several continents, and fossils of hatchlings, juveniles, and adults have been found for most major groups.
One remarkable find was in Montana, where fossils of duckbill dinosaurs, including eggs, nests, hatchlings, juveniles, and adults were found together in one death assemblage, or mass grave. The eggshells in the nests were badly broken, arousing speculation that the hatchlings might have crushed the eggs while moving around the nests. Some paleontologists think this site was a nesting colony, where adult dinosaurs cared for their young during the first several months after hatching.

One of the greatest highlights of the American Museum of Natural History’s expedition to Central Asia occurred in 1923 at the Flaming Cliffs of Mongolia. It involved the discovery of eggs that, after first analysis, were thought to belong to the dinosaur Protoceratops. Roy Chapman Andrews, the leader of the expedition and future director of the Museum, described the scene in his field notes

Estimates vary, but in terms of extinct non-avian dinosaurs, about 300 valid genera and roughly 700 valid species have been discovered and named. However, given that the fossil record is incomplete, in the sense that scientists have yet to discover fossils of other kinds of dinosaurs that no doubt existed, these numbers do not reflect the true diversity of extinct dinosaurs.
One reason for the incompleteness of the fossil record is that rocks for some geologic time periods are not commonly found on the surface of the Earth. For example, many more kinds of Late Cretaceous dinosaurs are known than Middle Jurassic dinosaurs because outcrops of Late Cretaceous are more numerous and more widely spread geographically than those of Middle Jurassic age.

Dinosaurs are prehistoric reptiles that have lived on Earth from about 245 million years ago to the present. Modern birds are one kind of dinosaur because they share a common ancestor with non-avian dinosaurs.
Non-avian dinosaurs (all dinosaurs besides birds), which are now extinct, varied greatly in shape and size. Some weighed as much as 80 tons and were more than 120 feet long. Others were the size of a chicken and weighed as little as 8 pounds. All non-avian dinosaurs lived on land. Some may have gone into the swamps and lakes for food, but they did not live entirely in water. Meat-eaters walked on two legs and hunted alone or in groups. Plant-eaters walked on either two or four legs and grazed on plants.
The feature that distinguishes dinosaurs from other reptiles is a hole in the hip socket, which allowed dinosaurs to walk upright. Pterosaurs, or flying reptiles, and plesiosaurs, ocean-dwelling reptiles, did not have this feature and were not dinosaurs.

A fossil is any evidence of prehistoric life (plant or animal) that is at least 10,000 years old. The most common fossils are bones and teeth, but fossils of footprints and skin impressions exist as well. Fossils are excavated from many environments, including ancient riverbeds and lakes, caves, volcanic ash falls, and tar pits. Fossils are classified as either body fossils or trace fossils. Body fossils were parts of the organism, such as bones or teeth. Trace fossils are all other types of fossils, including foot impressions, burrows, and dung.

Most ancient animals never became fossils. Their carcasses were likely consumed by other organisms, or worn away by wind or water. But sometimes the conditions were right and their remains were preserved. The most common process of fossilization happens when an animal is buried by sediment, such as sand or silt, shortly after it dies. Its bones are protected from rotting by layers of sediment. As its body decomposes all the fleshy parts wear away and only the hard parts, like bones, teeth, and horns, are left behind. Over millions of years, water in the nearby rocks surrounds these hard parts, and minerals in the water replace them, bit by bit. When the minerals have completely replaced the organic tissue, what's left is a solid rock copy of the original specimen.

Fossils are found almost exclusively in sedimentary rocks—rocks that form when sand, silt, mud, and organic material settle out of water or air to form layers that are then compacted into rock. So in looking for non-avian dinosaur fossils in particular, paleontologists look for outcrops of sedimentary rocks that formed during the Mesozoic Era (251–65.6 million years ago), the geologic time period when non-avian dinosaurs lived. Scientists typically search in regions where little vegetation covers the surface of the ground, so that any fossil fragments weathering out of the sedimentary rock layers can be more easily seen. These regions of barren ridges and ravines are often referred to as ‘badlands.’
In order to find appropriate Mesozoic, sedimentary rock layers, paleontologists often use geologic maps, which show the kinds of rock layers of different geologic ages that are exposed on Earth’s surface in different regions. Once appropriate rock layers are found, the search for dinosaur fossils can begin with a reasonable hope of finding the kinds of dinosaurs one is searching for. And other kinds of fossils are often serendipitously discovered during the search.

To find fossils, paleontologists conduct expeditions to regions around the world where fossils are likely to be found. To be successful, this fieldwork requires considerable funding and careful planning. Each trip is designed to try and find fossils that will shed new light on particular research questions. Often, scientists choose destinations for their field work in regions where fossils have already been found, but if not, geologic maps and satellite photos are used to identify areas where rocks of the right age and ancient environment are exposed on the surface.
To find fossils, paleontologists first carry out an operation called prospecting, which involves slowly hiking across ridges and through ravines, while keeping one's eyes focused on the ground in hopes of finding fragments of fossils weathering out on the surface. Commonly, one covers 5 to 10 miles in a day while prospecting. Once a fossil fragment is found, the collector brushes away the loose dirt on the surface to see whether more of the specimen is buried in the ground. If so, quarrying is initiated to collect the fossil. First, awls, rock hammers, chisels, and other tools are used to remove the rock covering the bones to see how much of the skeleton is present. As fossil bone is exposed, special glue is applied to the cracks and fractures to hold the fossil together. 
Next, a trench is dug around the fossil so that it essentially sits on a low pedestal, still encased in its surrounding rock, or matrix. A covering of damp toilet paper is placed over the fossilized bones before a layer of plaster bandages is wrapped around the matrix to create a hard cast, just like a doctor does around a broken bone. Once the cast hardens, excavating the fossil is completed by snapping the matrix from the underlying rock, and the fossil in its cast is packed for shipment back to the Museum.

Fossil preparators are highly skilled technicians who extract fossils from the surround matrix, use adhesives and consolidants to stabilize the fossils and prepare molds and casts of the specimens.
When fossils arrive from the field, they are encased in plaster jackets, as well as the rock, or matrix, which surrounds the fossils. Fossil preparation involves cutting open the plaster jacket and removing this matrix surrounding the fossil. The matrix may be soft and crumbly, when the sand or mud is poorly cemented together, or it can be extremely hard, when the sediments are well cemented. Accordingly, a wide variety of tools are required to remove the matrix and stabilize the fossil. Commonly, dental tools are used to carefully pick away sediment near the bone, along with custom-made needles composed of carbide steel. Formerly, chisels and hammers were used to remove blocks of matrix farther away from the bone, but recently, smaller mechanical tools have taken their place. These include small grinding wheels, miniature jackhammers called air scribes, and tiny sand-blasters powered by compressed air.
Preparators often use these tools while examining the fossil through a precision microscope under high-quality lighting to make sure delicate features on the fossils are not damaged. They carefully select the materials used to strengthen or repair specimens. Adhesives, glues, and fillers must stand the test of time and not become brittle or discolored, just like the materials used to conserve works of art. The types of materials used are recorded in order to aid future preparators should additional preparation or repair be required.

The code requires that a scientific name for a dinosaur be composed of two parts. The first part, called the genus, is always capitalized; the second, called the specific epithet, is never capitalized. Both names are always italicized, and sometimes the genus name is abbreviated (as in T. rex for Tyrannosaurus rex). The genus name may be used alone to refer to all the species in a particular genus.

Dinosaur names are often made up of combinations of Greek and Latin root words that describe anatomical characteristics or how the animal might have behaved. Other dinosaur names might honor a person or denote where the fossil remains were discovered. In 1841, Richard Owen, the first director of London’s Natural History Museum, gave the name dinosaurs to these giant prehistoric reptiles. The word dinosaur is from the Greek deinos (terrible) and sauros (lizard). Some dinosaur names are short; others are tongue twisters.